5178 autoscaling improvements (#5180)
platformsh/platformsh-docs: sites/upsun/src/manage-resources/autoscaling.md

  - "scaling"
---

Autoscaling is a feature that automatically adjusts how many instances of your application are running, increasing capacity when demand rises, and reducing it when things are quiet. It helps your app stay responsive under heavy load while keeping your infrastructure costs efficient.

## What is autoscaling?

Autoscaling works through [horizontal scaling](/manage-resources/adjust-resources.html#horizontal-scaling), by adding or removing whole application instances depending on resource usage. If CPU utilization stays above a certain threshold for a set time, {{% vendor/name %}} automatically adds more instances. If it stays low, {{% vendor/name %}} removes unneeded ones. You control these thresholds and limits, so scaling always happens safely and predictably.

- **Scope:** Available for applications only  
- **Product tiers:** Available for all Upsun Flex environments  
- **Environments:** Configurable per environment - across development, staging, and production

{{< note theme="info" title="Know your app first">}}

> Autoscaling is quick to set up: you can [enable it in a few clicks](#enable-autoscaling) from your environment’s **Configure resources** tab. However, because it reacts to real traffic patterns, it’s important to understand your app’s typical performance before turning it on. 

Author: Removed reference to traffic patterns in this note so we don't mislead users, thank you @ricardokirkner !

This cycle ensures your app automatically scales up during high demand and scales down when demand drops, helping balance performance with cost efficiency.

## Memory-based autoscaling

Autoscaling primarily relies on CPU utilization as its trigger, however you can also configure memory-based autoscaling, which works in a similar way, but with a few important differences to understand.

### CPU-based triggers

CPU-based autoscaling reacts to sustained changes in average CPU utilization.

- Scale-up threshold: When average CPU usage stays above your defined limit for the evaluation period, instances are added to distribute the load.
- Scale-down threshold: When CPU usage remains below your lower limit for the evaluation period, instances are removed to save resources.
- Cooldown window: A delay (default: 5 minutes) before another scaling action can occur.

### Memory-based triggers

Memory-based autoscaling follows the same principle as CPU triggers but measures average memory utilization instead. When your app consistently uses more memory than your upper threshold, {{% vendor/name %}} adds instances; when memory usage remains low, it removes them.

> This option is useful for workloads where memory pressure, caching, or in-memory data handling determine performance — for example, large data processing apps or services with persistent caching layers.

Author: ```suggestion
This option is useful for workloads where caching or in-memory data handling determine performance - for example, large data processing apps or services with persistent caching layers.
```

This cycle ensures your app automatically scales up during high demand and scales down when demand drops, helping balance performance with cost efficiency.

## Memory-based autoscaling

Autoscaling primarily relies on CPU utilization as its trigger, however you can also configure memory-based autoscaling, which works in a similar way, but with a few important differences to understand.

### CPU-based triggers

CPU-based autoscaling reacts to sustained changes in average CPU utilization.

> - Scale-up threshold: When average CPU usage stays above your defined limit for the evaluation period, Upsun adds instances to distribute the load.

Author: ```suggestion
- Scale-up threshold: When average CPU usage stays above your defined limit for the evaluation period, instances are added to distribute the load.
```
